The Comprehensive Order of New Discoveries
id: a law that gave the job of making peace with the Indians to the Spanish missionaries.
sig: These orders led to the set up of missions in the tribes living on Spanish territory in Florida and Southwest America. The missionaries tried to get the Indians to assimiliate with very little luck. This plan eventually led back to warfare.
Pope's Rebellion
id: Pope was an Indian Shaman who led a rebellion against Spanish settlers in New Mexico. He successfully drove them to El Paso. His success was short-lived though.
sig: When the Spanish reasserted their control on the Puebloan people, the Pueblos agreed to compromise religiously. The Indian society became paterlineal with a religious mix of Chrisitanity and native beliefs.
New France
id: The French colony in Canada. It was founded by Samuel de Chaplain as a trade-post called Quebec. Built for fur trading. Little desire from French to settle the harsh wilderness.
sig: The French kicked-off the fur trade in Europe. This also caused the Indians to acquire guns which were then used to fight old rivalerys. Robert de La Salle traveled down the Mississippi River looking for more fur and founded Lousiana and New Orleans.
Iroquois
id: The Five Nations of the Iroquois started wars with many weaker tribes. The already strong tribe dominated along with the guns acquired from trading with the French and Dutch.
sig: The conquered tribes were were pushed West to find new homes. The Iroquois were the strongest tribe on the East Coast and so they were the only ones left for awhile. They were also cannibals. 
Jesuits
id: French priests from the Society of Jesus. They respected Indian values and tried to understand them. They were initially welcomed.
sig: Like previous and future mission experiences the Indians only were interested for so long. Once the Jesuits promises didn't come true most Indians returned to their native religions.
New Netherland
id: The Dutch settlements. IT was the smallest country to colonize. IT also managed to take over Portuguese ports in Africa and Brazilian sugar plantations. Henry Hudson founded Fort Orange for them.
sig: They also had a colony on Manhattan Island that they soon lost to the British. They became a fur-trading colony as well and were brutal to their Indian neighbors. The West India Company ignored the colony and England took control of it.
Jamestown
id: Named in honor of Elizabeth I. Gold was the goal of the young male inhabitants, many settlers didn't survive because of climate and no knowledge of growing food.
sig: Helped by the Powhatans. The cash crop, tobacco, started its huge trade empire here. Tobacco became huge in the colonies due to demand in Europe.
The House of Burgesses
id: A representative government made laws and collected taxes. It was the "peoples" government though the governor and council could veto laws.
sig: During Bacon's Rebellion the House was mostly run by rich, white, landowners. After the rebellion the House got some poorer members.
Lord Baltimore
id: The proprietor fo the colony called Maryland.
sig: Founded the colony as a Catholic refuge though Catholics still remained a minority. He wanted religious freedom. Maryland was another tobacco colony.
Tobacco
id: A drug Europeans really craved. A major cash-crop among colonies.
sig: James I didn't like it but the boost it gave the royal treasury changed his mind. Destroyed soil quality which caused settlers to take more Indian land.
Indentured Servant
id: An English servant whose passage to America is paid for by a wealthy landowner in exchange for 5-7 years of contract labor.
sig: A large number of migrants were indetured servants. The servants also paved the way for slavery.
Chattel Slavery
id: The ownership of humans, not acknowledged by English law until Bacon's Rebellion which brought a realization that African slaves were more reliable labor.
sig: Reason for mass diaspora of Africans to the Americas. Formation of a new trade.
Bacon's Rebellion
id: Rebellion started by Nathaniel Bacon, a frontier estate owner, who wanted to get rid of the Indians surrounding the colony. Ran the corrupt Governer Berkeley out of office.
sig: Launched the mass import of African slaves. Curbed corruption and appointed poorer yeoman to the House of Burgesses, allowing landless white men to vote.
Plymouth
id: The settlement founded on Cape Cod by Purtians looking for religious freedom. Became a well functioning society with little external threat. 
sig: Once established it attracted many Puritans and other migrants to America.
Massachusetts Bay
id: Founded by John Winthrop, who wanted the colony to be considered a "city upon a hill." A joint-stock corporation.
sig: No religious freedom and purged out dissidents. Followed John Calvin's belief of pre-destination. 
Puritans
id: A Protestant religious group from England that didn't like the Catholic teachings in the Church of England so they migrated to America.
sig: Founded Plymouth, Massachusetts Bay and Rhode Island, and Connecticut colonies.
Roger Williams
id: A Puritan dissident. He wanted religous tolerance and called for the seperation of church and state.
sig: He founded Rhode Island with a corporate charter from Parliament.
Anne Hutchinson
id: A Puritan dissident who preached against pre-destination.
sig: Most likely banned because she was female not because of ideas. Followed Roger Williams to Rhode Island.
Salem Witch Trials
id: Trails held in Salem, Massachusetts. 175 people arrested for witchcraft, 19 hung, mostly rich (all fake?).
sig: Changed the beliefs that sudden death and strange happenings were natural causes not witchcraft.
Metacom's War
id: War started by Wampanoag Indian chief Metacom. Also called King Phillips War. It was his effort to expel the English settlers
sig: Set the stage for later conflicts with French Catholics. One of the last major conflicts with Indians in that time period.
Fur-trade
id: THe trade of animal furs between Indians and Europeans.
sig: Changed the environment. Endangered animal species. Introduced Indians to destructive things such as alcohol. Shifted tribal power.
Headright System
id: A tract of land given to land owners who sponsored indentured servants.
sig: Allowed the wealthy to get wealthier and used up land, leading to wars against the Indians for more land and space.

